programs/README.md, before:

# Installation manual
For the CPEG course we need the programs Python, R, and Tracer. This tutorial shows how to install them and the required add-on packages.

## 1. Install python 3.12

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3129/

Direct download links:

[Windows x86](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/python-3.12.9-amd64.exe)

[Mac](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/python-3.12.9-macos11.pkg)

[Linux](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/Python-3.12.9.tgz)


This installation has not been tested on machines using ARM CPUs like Chromebooks or Windows and Linux using Qualcomm/Snapdragon chips.


If you are using Windows, make sure to check the two boxes _Install launcher_ and _Add python to PATH_

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/python_path.png" alt="Check boxes" width="750">

## 2. Install R

Download and install [R](https://cran.rstudio.com/)

If you are using Windows, you need to manullay add the command line version of R (called _Rscript.exe_) onto your PATH system variables. You can find some instructions [here](https://www.java.com/en/download/help/path.html)

- Press Windows + R keys
- Type _sysdm.cpl_ to open the control panel
- Click on the _Advanced_ tab
- Click on _environmental variables_
- Click on the entry _PATH_ in the field _System variable_ and then _Edit..._
- Click on the button _New_ and add the path to the bin folder of your R installation, e.g. ```C:\Program Files\R\R-4.45.1\bin```
- Move this entry up to no be in the last position

This is a good moment to verify that python has been added to the system PATH during its installation. Check if the PATH includes the directory of your python, e.g. ```C:\Program Files\python312\``` and ```C:\Program Files\python312\Scripts\```.

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/rscript.png" alt="system path" width="750">

RStudio is recommended for the DeepDive tutorial but not an requirement. You can install it from [here](https://posit.co/downloads/).


## 3. Obtain Tracer

The program Tracer is used to assess convergence of Bayesian inferences by opening a _log_ file of an analyses. You can download it from [here](https://github.com/beast-dev/tracer/releases). Tracer is an executable file that can just be opened and no installation is needed.

## 4. Download the cpeg25 github repository

- Use the green _code_ button to download a zip folder, unpack it, and rename it from _cpeg25-main_ to just cpeg25
- Open your command prompt window on Windows or a terminal console on Mac/Linux and move with `cd` into your cpeg25 folder
	- You need to use backslashes on Windows, e.g.

		```
		cd c:\...\cpeg25
		```

		and slashes on Mac and Linux

		```
		cd /.../cpeg25
		```



## 5. Create a virtual python environment

- Create a virtual environment called _venv_ within your cpeg25 folder. Sometimes Window requires ```py``` instead of ```python```
	
	```
	python -m venv venv
	```

- Activate the virtual environment

	- Windows

		```
		.\venv\Scripts\activate
		```
	- Mac and Linux
	
		```
		source venv/bin/activate
		```




## 6. Install python packages

Install all the packages listed in the _requirements.txt_ file located in the subdirectory _programs_ of your _cpeg25_ folder

Windows:
```
pip install -r .\programs\requirements.txt
```

Mac/Linux:
```
pip install -r ./programs/requirements.txt
```

## 7. Install R packages

Open R and install the packages we need.

```
install.packages(c("remotes", "vioplot", "scales"))
library(remotes)
remotes::install_github("DeepDive-project/DeepDiveR")
q()
```

## 8. Check installation

As the last step, we verify that all installations were successful and we are ready for the CPEG course.

Windows:
```
python .\programs\test_cpeg_programs.py
```

Mac/Linux:
```
python ./programs/test_cpeg_programs.py
```

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/test_cpeg_programs.png" alt="test installations" width="500">

Commit message:

add link back to start page

programs/README.md, after:

# Installation manual
For the CPEG course we need the programs Python, R, and Tracer. This tutorial shows how to install them and the required add-on packages.

## 1. Install python 3.12

https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3129/

Direct download links:

[Windows x86](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/python-3.12.9-amd64.exe)

[Mac](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/python-3.12.9-macos11.pkg)

[Linux](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.12.9/Python-3.12.9.tgz)


This installation has not been tested on machines using ARM CPUs like Chromebooks or Windows and Linux using Qualcomm/Snapdragon chips.


If you are using Windows, make sure to check the two boxes _Install launcher_ and _Add python to PATH_

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/python_path.png" alt="Check boxes" width="750">

## 2. Install R

Download and install [R](https://cran.rstudio.com/)

If you are using Windows, you need to manullay add the command line version of R (called _Rscript.exe_) onto your PATH system variables. You can find some instructions [here](https://www.java.com/en/download/help/path.html)

- Press Windows + R keys
- Type _sysdm.cpl_ to open the control panel
- Click on the _Advanced_ tab
- Click on _environmental variables_
- Click on the entry _PATH_ in the field _System variable_ and then _Edit..._
- Click on the button _New_ and add the path to the bin folder of your R installation, e.g. ```C:\Program Files\R\R-4.45.1\bin```
- Move this entry up to no be in the last position

This is a good moment to verify that python has been added to the system PATH during its installation. Check if the PATH includes the directory of your python, e.g. ```C:\Program Files\python312\``` and ```C:\Program Files\python312\Scripts\```.

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/rscript.png" alt="system path" width="750">

RStudio is recommended for the DeepDive tutorial but not an requirement. You can install it from [here](https://posit.co/downloads/).


## 3. Obtain Tracer

The program Tracer is used to assess convergence of Bayesian inferences by opening a _log_ file of an analyses. You can download it from [here](https://github.com/beast-dev/tracer/releases). Tracer is an executable file that can just be opened and no installation is needed.

## 4. Download the cpeg25 github repository

- Use the green _code_ button (on the [start page](https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25)) to download a zip folder of the cpeg25 repository, unpack it, and rename it from _cpeg25-main_ to just cpeg25
- Open your command prompt window on Windows or a terminal console on Mac/Linux and move with `cd` into your cpeg25 folder
	- You need to use backslashes on Windows, e.g.

		```
		cd c:\...\cpeg25
		```

		and slashes on Mac and Linux

		```
		cd /.../cpeg25
		```



## 5. Create a virtual python environment

- Create a virtual environment called _venv_ within your cpeg25 folder. Sometimes Window requires ```py``` instead of ```python```
	
	```
	python -m venv venv
	```

- Activate the virtual environment

	- Windows

		```
		.\venv\Scripts\activate
		```
	- Mac and Linux
	
		```
		source venv/bin/activate
		```




## 6. Install python packages

Install all the packages listed in the _requirements.txt_ file located in the subdirectory _programs_ of your _cpeg25_ folder

Windows:
```
pip install -r .\programs\requirements.txt
```

Mac/Linux:
```
pip install -r ./programs/requirements.txt
```

## 7. Install R packages

Open R and install the packages we need.

```
install.packages(c("remotes", "vioplot", "scales"))
library(remotes)
remotes::install_github("DeepDive-project/DeepDiveR")
q()
```

## 8. Check installation

As the last step, we verify that all installations were successful and we are ready for the CPEG course.

Windows:
```
python .\programs\test_cpeg_programs.py
```

Mac/Linux:
```
python ./programs/test_cpeg_programs.py
```

<img src="https://github.com/thauffe/cpeg25/blob/main/pictures/test_cpeg_programs.png" alt="test installations" width="500">
